TUGboat, Volume 0 (9999), No. 0
Real-Time LuaTEX: Recompiling Large
Documents in 1ms
Clemens Lode
Abstract
This paper shows that pixel-perfect LATEX output and
real-time editing are not mutually exclusive. Line
breaking is paragraph-local; page breaking is global
but not perceptually immediate and therefore need
not block the editing loop.
By extracting display lists directly from LuaTEX’s node structures (bypassing PDF generation),
a single paragraph can be recompiled and its display list delivered in ∼1 ms, using vanilla TEX Live
with no engine modifications and full microtype [6]
support.
We demonstrate that this approach is sufficient
to build software that can recompile large documents
in real time: texlode, a browser-based book authoring tool with output identical to standard LuaLATEX.
Benchmarks show that per-paragraph recompilation
achieves O(1) latency, constant regardless of document size, whereas Typst’s [3] incremental compilation scales linearly (O(n)).
The tradeoff is temporary inconsistency: pages
the user is not viewing may lag until a background
compile converges, the same pattern word processors
have used for decades.
1

The speed problem

LuaLATEX compilation scales poorly with document
size. A 100-page book may take 10–30 seconds to
compile, making interactive editing (even with caching)
impossible. Cloud compilation (for example, Overleaf) helps with toolchain complexity but not with the
fundamental bottleneck: long documents with complex preambles, OpenType fonts, and full microtype
settings are computationally costly.
Word processors solved this decades ago. Word,
InDesign, and Google Docs recompile only the edited
paragraph on each keystroke; the rest of the document stays put until a background process reconverges global layout. LATEX has never worked this
way, not because TEX’s algorithms are too slow, but
because its architecture treats compilation as a monolithic, file-in-to-file-out operation.
This paper grew out of a decade of providing
LATEX publishing services, over thirty client books,
and the author’s own How to Publish Your Book with
LATEX [5]. The book documents the complete selfpublishing workflow using LuaLATEX, and in doing
so, documents the pain: client books with complex
fonts routinely hit Overleaf’s compile timeout. It

draft: June 13, 2026 03:22

?1

recommends using draft mode during editing, then
switching to a local installation for final output, forcing authors to choose between typographic quality
and interactive feedback.
The question this paper addresses is not how to
make LuaTEX faster, but whether full compilation
is even necessary during editing.
2

Prior approaches

The LATEX community and its neighbors have tried
several strategies to make typesetting feel interactive.
TeXpresso [1] achieves near-real-time XETEX rendering through process snapshotting. Every
∼500 ms of processing, the driver forks the engine, creating a copy-on-write checkpoint. When
an edit arrives, it finds the most recent checkpoint before the change and re-runs from there.
This incrementality with full reruns from optimal starting points requires a modified XETEX
engine and fork(), limiting it to Linux and
macOS.
SwiftLaTeX and BusyTeX [7, 8] compile TEX
Live to WebAssembly, enabling client-side LATEX
in the browser. But compilation still processes
the full document each time.
Typst rebuilt typesetting from scratch around incremental compilation. Every element depends
only on explicit inputs, enabling automatic memoization at the engine level. The result is fast
(single-digit milliseconds for small documents),
and the engine is clean, modern, and well-engineered.
But it is inherently incompatible with LATEX,
and its incremental recompilation still scales
linearly with document size.
These approaches share an assumption: that
the unit of compilation is the document. They differ
in how to make that unit cheaper: better checkpointing, smarter memoization, faster engines. None
asks whether full compilation is necessary in the first
place.
3

The measurement

How long does LuaTEX actually need to typeset a
paragraph? We can find out by wrapping paragraph
text between two \directlua timing calls, as in
Figure 1; running the file with lualatex prints the
time to the terminal.
On a mid-range laptop (Intel Core i7-1355U,
TEX Live 2025), this consistently reports under 1 ms.
Because a single compile is often faster than the resolution of os.gettimeofday(), a more systematic
benchmark amortizes the timer — each sample is the
mean of 100 consecutive in-session compiles — and

?2

draft: June 13, 2026 03:22

% paragraph-benchmark.tex
\documentclass{book}
\usepackage{microtype}
\begin{document}
\directlua{t0 = os.gettimeofday()}%
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
\par
\directlua{
local ms = (os.gettimeofday() - t0) * 1000
texio.write_nl("Paragraph: "
.. math.floor(ms * 100 + 0.5) / 100 .. " ms")
}
\end{document}

Figure 1: A self-contained single-paragraph timing
example; run with lualatex and read the terminal
output.
Table 1: Per-paragraph line-breaking time by
paragraph type in vanilla LuaLATEX (median, P5, and
P95 over 30 amortized samples).
Paragraph length
Median
P5
P95
Short (1 line)
0.17 ms 0.03 ms 0.96 ms
Medium (4–5 lines) 0.70 ms 0.65 ms 0.89 ms
Long (10+ lines)
1.99 ms 1.87 ms 2.41 ms
Inline math
0.20 ms 0.17 ms 0.27 ms
Display math
0.11 ms 0.10 ms 0.13 ms

reports median, P5, and P95 over 30 such samples
after a 5-sample warmup:
The dominant cost is line breaking, not content
complexity: a one-line paragraph with inline math
(0.20 ms) is faster than a plain five-line paragraph
(0.70 ms). Display math is particularly fast because
it produces a single-line box with no break-point
search.
4

Why one paragraph is enough

TUGboat, Volume 0 (9999), No. 0
Table 2: Median per-paragraph compile time in
each window. No degradation has been observed;
the variation between windows is noise, the variation
between columns reflects paragraph length.
Compile window
Short Multi-line
1–50
0.12 ms
1.89 ms
226–275
0.09 ms
1.84 ms
451–500
0.09 ms
1.93 ms

cessor can reconverge global layout while the user
continues typing.
The challenge for LATEX is that TEX was never
designed to work this way. Word processors have
built-in paragraph renderers that can be called as
functions. TEX is a batch processor: it reads files,
processes the entire document, and writes output.
There is no API for “compile this one paragraph and
return the result”.
Our engineering contribution, texlode, adapts
LuaTEX to this pattern: keeping the engine alive,
feeding it individual paragraphs, and extracting results from internal structures that were not meant
to be an output format.
To verify that compile time is truly independent
of document state, we ran 500 consecutive paragraph
compiles in a single LuaTEX engine session:
The locality claim has boundaries. Footnotes
couple a paragraph to page breaking; counter-dependent
content (\ref, \thepage) requires global state; \parshape
set by surrounding code is unavailable in isolation.
These cases fall to the background convergence path,
the same full compile that resolves page numbers
and float placement. The fast path handles body
text, which is where the user spends most editing
time and where latency matters most.

A single paragraph is a meaningful unit of work
because of a structural property of TEX, evident in
5 From measurement to real-time editor
the Knuth–Plass line-breaking algorithm [4]:
Compiling only the edited paragraph and converging
Line breaking is local. Given the same \hsize
global layout in the background is how every modern
and content, TEX produces identical line breaks
word processor works. The engineering challenge
regardless of what appears before or after the
is adapting LuaTEX’s batch-mode architecture to
paragraph. Changing one paragraph does not
support it.
affect how any other paragraph breaks into lines.
Page breaking is global. A paragraph’s height changeKeeping the engine alive. LuaTEX startup takes
can cascade through the rest of the document:
∼1 second for a book-class preamble with Opensubsequent paragraphs may shift to different
Type fonts. We maintain a persistent LuaTEX
pages, floats may move, page numbers may
process that accepts paragraph content, comchange.
piles it, and returns the result without restarting.
This separation is exactly what word processors exploit. During editing, the user is looking at
Capturing output without PDF. Generating a
one paragraph on one page. The only operation
PDF for a single paragraph would add signifithat changes what they see at that moment is line
cant overhead. Instead, we extract the display
breaking, and line breaking is local. Page breaking
list directly from LuaTEX’s node structures after
matters, but it does not need to happen on the same
line breaking: a stream of positioned glyph comkeystroke. A background process of the word promands with coordinates in scaled points. The

TUGboat, Volume 0 (9999), No. 0
Table 3: Time breakdown for a single per-paragraph
round trip.
Pipeline stage
Short Medium
LuaTEX (line break + traversal) 0.65 ms
4.99 ms
IPC + serialization
0.12 ms
1.03 ms
Deserialization + expansion
0.02 ms
0.09 ms
Total round-trip
0.79 ms
6.11 ms

traversal must correctly replicate TEX’s internal
position calculations, including all microtype
adjustments, to produce output identical to standard LuaTEX compilation. TEX was never designed to expose its internal rendering state;
extracting a pixel-identical display list from LuaTEX’s post-line-break node structures required
reverse-engineering internal conventions with no
prior precedent.
Rendering in the browser. The glyph stream is
sent to the browser and drawn to HTML5 Canvas
via opentype.js. Each glyph command maps
to a Canvas path at the coordinates specified by
the engine. Rules (filled rectangles) and color
operations complete the primitives.
Background convergence. A full document compile runs periodically, producing a complete
page-position cache. We overlay fast-path paragraphs at cached positions, so the user sees live
line breaking with correct global layout. Page
numbers, cross-references, and float placement
converge through this path, typically within seconds of an edit.
A pipeline breakdown shows where time is spent:
Over 80 % of the time is LuaTEX’s line-breaking
algorithm, the useful work. The engineering overhead
stays under 20 %.
texlode, the browser-based book editor built
on this architecture, is scheduled for public release in
October 2026. It provides collaborative editing via
conflict-free replicated data types (CRDTs), manuscript import from Word, proceedings management,
cover design tools, and print-ready PDF output identical to standard LuaLATEX. The accompanying conference talk demonstrates the editor in action. For
details: texlode.com.
6

Comparison to Typst

Typst’s incremental compilation is fast, but its architecture reconverges global layout on every edit. To
measure the cost, we edit the same medium paragraph at the middle of documents of increasing size,
compiling with Typst 0.14.2 in watch mode (its standard interactive editing workflow) and recompiling
only that paragraph in LuaLATEX:

draft: June 13, 2026 03:22

?3

Table 4: Both engines edit the same medium
paragraph. The LuaLATEX column is constant: only
the edited paragraph is recompiled, so its cost equals
the single-paragraph time from §3, independent of
document size. The Typst column grows linearly
because Typst reconverges the full document layout.
Document size Typst 0.14.2 LuaLATEX
10 pages
12.6 ms
0.70 ms
100 pages
76 ms
0.70 ms
300 pages
206 ms
0.70 ms

Typst reconverges global layout by design: it
guarantees globally consistent output on every run.
But a visual text editor like texlode does not need
that guarantee on every keystroke, it only needs
the paragraph the user is looking at to be correct
now, and the rest of the document to converge soon.
Typst’s 206 ms for a 300-page book corresponds to
roughly 5 fps, usable but visibly laggy for smooth
drag interactions.
Human-computer interaction research identifies
100 ms as the threshold below which responses feel
instantaneous [2]; one display frame at 60 Hz (16 ms)
is the budget for continuous visual feedback. At
0.1–2 ms per paragraph, LuaLATEX sits inside the
frame budget: layout stops being an artifact you
regenerate and becomes a continuous quantity you
can manipulate. Text reflows around a figure in
real time as you reposition it, table contents are readjusted in real time as you change column widths,
line breaks settle keystroke by keystroke, and adjustments to leading or font size produce smooth,
immediate feedback, all with full microtype support
in every update, not approximated or deferred.
Benchmark scripts for the vanilla-LuaLATEX paragraph timing and the Typst comparison are available
at github.com/texlode/luatex-benchmark.
7

Conclusion

Per-paragraph reflow during editing is standard practice; word processors have worked this way for decades.
What was missing was the implementation for LuaTEX. Adapting LuaTEX to the interactive pattern
required engineering: persistent engines, display list
extraction from node structures never designed as
an output format, browser rendering, background
layout convergence. But the line-breaking algorithm
that Knuth designed is fast enough to run on every keystroke. We just had to stop asking it to
compile entire documents. Authors of book-length
LATEX documents no longer have to choose between
typographic quality and interactive feedback.

?4

draft: June 13, 2026 03:22

References
[1] F. Bour.
TeXpresso: Live rendering and
error reporting for LATEX.
TUGboat
44(2):185–192, 2023.
tug.org/TUGboat/
tb44-2/tb138bour-texpresso.pdf
[2] S.K. Card, T.P. Moran, A. Newell. The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1983.
[3] M. Haug. Fast typesetting with incremental
compilation. Master’s thesis, Technische Universität Berlin, 2022. user.tu-berlin.de/mhaug/
fast-typesetting-incremental-compilation.
pdf
[4] D.E. Knuth, M.F. Plass. Breaking paragraphs
into lines. Software — Practice and Experience,
11(11):1119–1184, 1981.
[5] C. Lode. How to Publish Your Book with LATEX.
LODE Publishing, 2026. www.lodepublishing.
com/book/latex-book-publishing-in-2026/
[6] R. Schlicht. The microtype package: Subliminal refinements towards typographical perfection,
2024. ctan.org/pkg/microtype
[7] SwiftLaTeX. SwiftLaTeX, the visual LATEX editor.
github.com/SwiftLaTeX/SwiftLaTeX
[8] TeXlyre.
BusyTeX: TEX live compiled to
WebAssembly, 2026.
github.com/TeXlyre/
texlyre-busytex
 Clemens Lode
Düsseldorf, Germany
clemens (at) lodepublishing dot
com
https://www.lodepublishing.
com/

TUGboat, Volume 0 (9999), No. 0

